Child labour among boys in rural India is on the decline. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for the rural girl child. While the absolute index for the male child labourer is still higher than the index for the female child labourer, increasing substitution of the female child for the male child may fast equalise the index.

The index of child labour, computed every decade, stands at 78 for rural male children for the year '01(the last year of the index's computation). This is a 15.4% decline over the value of the index in 1971, when it was 90. On the other hand, the child labour index for the rural girl child has risen by close to 25% over the period. The index stands at 61 for '01 as against 49 during 1971.

There has been a huge spurt in employment of the girl child in almost every industry. The maximum rise has been seen in the manufacturing and construction industries. From 1971 to '01, there has been a rise of almost 88% in each of these industry groups. For male child labourers also, these are the very industries showing a rise in employment index.

For manufacturing the rise is 74%, while it is 20% for construction. But for the male child, these rises are more than made up for by a fall in certain other sectors like mining and agriculture.

For the girl child labourer, while mining has shown a decline in employment, there is a rise in the agriculture employment index. This could be on account of the fact that girl child labourers are making up for the decline in the male child's employment in the sector. In fact, the overall rise in the index of child labour for the girl child and a corresponding decline in the same for the male child could be due to the substitution of the female child for the male child.

Why should such a substitution occur? The answer can be found in the rising literacy rates among rural males as co mpared with rural women. Over the decades, the percentage gap between literacy rates achieved by rural women and rural men has been on the rise. In 1971, the difference between literacy rates of rural men and rural women was 20 percentage points, and it has risen to over 25 percentage points in '01. This means, that while the male child is increasingly receiving the benefit of education, his female counterpart is possibly engaged in wage earning.
